Handling huge tracing specs (#453)
elastic/apm: specs/agents/tracing-spans-drop-fast-exit.md

[Agent spec home](README.md) > [Handling huge traces](tracing-spans-handling-huge-traces.md) > [Dropping fast exit spans](tracing-spans-drop-fast-exit.md)

# Dropping fast exit spans

If an exit span was really fast, chances are that it's not relevant for analyzing latency issues.
Therefore, agents SHOULD implement the strategy laid out in this section to let users choose the level of detail/cost tradeoff that makes sense for them.
If an agent implements this strategy, it MUST also implement [Collecting statistics about dropped spans](tracing-spans-dropped-stats.md).

## `exit_span_min_duration` configuration

Sets the minimum duration of exit spans.
Exit spans that execute faster than this threshold are attempted to be discarded.

> The attempt fails if they lead up to a span that can't be discarded.

Reviewer: Can you clarify what "they lead up to a span that can't be discarded" means here? Is it if a child span cannot be discarded?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In some cases exit spans cannot be discarded.
```

Spans that propagate the trace context to downstream services,
such as outgoing HTTP requests,
can't be discarded.
However, external calls that don't propagate context,
such as calls to a database, can be discarded using this threshold.

Additionally, spans that lead to an error can't be discarded.

|                |            |
|----------------|------------|
| Type           | `duration` |
| Default        | `1ms`      |
| Central config | `true`     |

TODO: should we introduce µs granularity for this config option?
Adding `us` to all `duration`-typed options would create compatibility issues.

> So we probably want to support `us` for this option only.

Reviewer 3: Why would adding a new duration suffix create compat issues? I'm missing something.

Reviewer 4: IIUC a potential backward compatibility issue comes up if we add support for `us` suffix to existing options and `us` suffix is used in central configuration while there is a mix of old (not support `us` suffix) and new agents.

## Limitations

The limitations are based on the premise that the `parent_id` of each span and transaction that's stored in Elasticsearch
should point to another valid transaction or span that's present in the Elasticsearch index.

A span that refers to a missing span via is `parent_id` is also known as an "orphaned span".

### Spans that propagate context to downstream services can't be discarded

We only know whether to discard after the call has ended.
At that point,
the trace has already continued on the downstream service.
Discarding the span for the external request would orphan the transaction of the downstream call.

Propagating the trace context to downstream services is also known as out-of-process context propagation.

## Implementation

### `discardable` flag

Spans store an additional `discardable` flag in order to determine whether a span can be discarded.
The default value is `true` for [exit spans](tracing-spans.md#exit-spans) and `false` for any other span.

According to the [limitations](#Limitations),
there are certain situations where the `discardable` flag of a span is set to `false`:

> - When an error is reported for this span

Reviewer 5: @SergeyKleyman this is relevant to what we discussed.
Should this look at the `outcome` instead? For example - any span with a non-success outcome MUST not be discarded.
It is a bit more inclusive than looking at errors.

Reviewer 4: Done - please take a look

[Agent spec home](README.md) > [Handling huge traces](tracing-spans-handling-huge-traces.md) > [Dropping fast exit spans](tracing-spans-drop-fast-exit.md)

# Dropping fast exit spans

If an exit span was really fast, chances are that it's not relevant for analyzing latency issues.
Therefore, agents SHOULD implement the strategy laid out in this section to let users choose the level of detail/cost tradeoff that makes sense for them.
If an agent implements this strategy, it MUST also implement [Collecting statistics about dropped spans](tracing-spans-dropped-stats.md).

## `exit_span_min_duration` configuration

Sets the minimum duration of exit spans.
Exit spans that execute faster than this threshold are attempted to be discarded.

The attempt fails if they lead up to a span that can't be discarded.

> Spans that propagate the trace context to downstream services,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, spans that propagate the trace context to downstream services,
```

## Limitations

The limitations are based on the premise that the `parent_id` of each span and transaction that's stored in Elasticsearch
should point to another valid transaction or span that's present in the Elasticsearch index.

A span that refers to a missing span via is `parent_id` is also known as an "orphaned span".

### Spans that propagate context to downstream services can't be discarded

We only know whether to discard after the call has ended.
At that point,
the trace has already continued on the downstream service.
Discarding the span for the external request would orphan the transaction of the downstream call.

Propagating the trace context to downstream services is also known as out-of-process context propagation.

## Implementation

### `discardable` flag

Spans store an additional `discardable` flag in order to determine whether a span can be discarded.
The default value is `true` for [exit spans](tracing-spans.md#exit-spans) and `false` for any other span.

According to the [limitations](#Limitations),
there are certain situations where the `discardable` flag of a span is set to `false`:

> - the span has `outcome` (i.e., `outcome` is present and it's not `null`) `outcome` is not `success`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- the span's `outcome` field is set to anything other than `success`.
```

Reviewer 4: Do you mean that a span with `outcome` field (or `outcome` with `null` value) should not be compressed?

Reviewer 5: Yes, that's what I meant. Agents shouldn't end spans without setting an outcome to them, it is allowed to be omitted for backward compatibility reason IIANM. So, assuming these are most likely custom user spans, I think we should default to not compressing them.
In general, since the main goal of this initiative is to reduce the amount of spans with minimal information loss, I think there should be rare cases of spans without outcome and therefore the default should be to not drop them. The fix for the inability to compress should be setting the outcome.
But I don't mind if we start with defaulting to compress.
